---
layout: post
title: "Shoganai"
date: 2017-01-06
---

# しょうがない (Shoganai)
The title of this post is a Japanese term that I felt fittingly described the state of stoicism I attempted to reach over my Christmas break.  Per [Maria Sugio](https://www.theodysseyonline.com/11-beautiful-untranslatable-japanese-words), _"The literal meaning of "Shoganai" is "it cannot be helped." However, it is not discouraging or despairing. It means to accept that something was out of your control. It encourages people to realize that it wasn't their fault and to move on with no regret."_ 
Sounds lofty eh?  Of course I must admit that that I did not intentionally, or even willingly, pursue this state of mind.  In reality it was a necessary survival mechanism for my nearly Griswold holiday hiatus.

# Baby, It's Cold Outside!
As you may have noticed, it has been a bit colder here in Boise these last couple of weeks, regularly dipping into single digits ('F) overnight.  Being a Montana native, this is nothing unusual and nothing to fear right?  Well besides the rising heating bill.  Why will no one in my house put on a sweater first?

# Baby, It's Cold...in here?
Noting the chart above we can see that on the 28th of December we reached a high of 28'F and dipped down to ~9'F that night.  That day in our house there was some mutterings of being cold so I checked the thermostat and it read ~65'F.  Feeling the holiday spirit imbue me with generosity I nudged the thermostat up to ~70'F and waited a bit before checking the temperature again.  An hour after that adjustment it was…60'F in the house!  Say what?!?!? Time to channel my inner "Tim the Toolman" and get to the bottom of this before ending up with frozen pipes.

_"Is the forced air running? Yes, I can feel chilly air coming out of the registers."_

Upon opening up furnace and cranking up thermostat, the hiss of natural gas being released and some clicks from the furnace reveals that it is attempting to do something.

_"Nothing looks hot though.  Where is the pilot light? What if I just turn it on and hold a lighter down around the gas nozzles?"_  Luckily nothing explodes and after a minute I reconsider the brilliance of this plan.  _"Hmm, perhaps I should do some additional research first."_ 

Call dad and hit up google.  _"Ah-hah, new furnaces utilize an electronic ignitor to avoid costs of a constantly lit pilot light! I salute you, oh inventor of the furnace ignitor!"_

  Turns out my particular furnace ignitor is of the hot surface variety and is essentially just a resistor that gets really hot.  Of course that constant cycling between room temp and 1800-3100'F causes some stresses and eventually makes this piece rather brittle.  This means the lifetime the ignitor is relatively short, ~4-7yrs, as compared with other components in the system (ideally +20years).  On the plus side, being such a simple component means that we are able to use a basic multimeter to verify continuaty/resistance. 

  The one from my non-functional furnace, shown on the left below, registered as an open circuit.  The brand new universal replacement ignitor purchased at Grover's for $50, right side of same image, measured at just under 9 ohms.  Finagling this piece into the furnace was a bit tricky as I opted against taking the whole thing apart to install as recommended but luckily I have nimble fingers and after 20 minutes of dropping screws and sailor speak it was in place.  A quick test via the Ecobee app and there was fire!

# Critical System PM's Decadely (and other bad ideas).
Unfortunately the prior fiasco was not the only adventure.  Being a split-level home with several rooms below grade built on packed clay a few feet above bedrock, a *sump pump* system is necessary to avoid flooding the lower levels in times of unually high runoff; like when we have a lot of snow and it suddenly warms up enough to cause lots of melt.  Recommendations are that you crawl under your house and check this system at least yearly.  The check can be as simple as manipulating your float to verify the pump still functions.  Even better is to add some water and verify your drain system continues to flow unabated.

Being such as busy individual I opted to perform this task on a slightly more extened schedule, namely every 8 years or so.  Any guesses as to the result?

Per code, the outlet near our kitchen sink is *GFIC* protected.  During the day after a decent snowfall this circuit started tripping repeatedly during the day without "anything" plugged into it.  Strange.  Oh wait, the sump pump does sit under this part of the house, perhaps it is worther crawling under there to give it a look?

Being home alone I hooked up a stereo to the GFIC outlet, cranked up the volume to _Maggie's Farm_, and went *spelunking*. 

The drain catch barrel was completely full, which is not a good sign unless we wanted a our den to become a wading pool.  Upon pulling the pump out I was looking at the mess you see at the left in the image below.  If you look closely you can see a bulging seal. 

Just to be extra sure it was the pump itself I decided to reset the circuit and throw it in the water again, *Pop!*, and there goes the stereo.   And my trouble light I had plugged into the pump outlet, plunging me into darkness...smooth.  Well at least I can't see the spiders anymore.  Running to Home Depot I located a $150 pump (see middle above) and brought it under the house with me.  Crap! I bought one with a __swinging float__ that requires a much wider barrel to function.  Back to the store once more!

This time I opted for the $200 *stainless steel* pump with a __vertical sliding float__; and a *5yr* warranty, the previous, mostly plastic pump only has a **1yr** warranty.  A quick swap-in and away goes all the water!  Another one down.

# Turning your NAS into a brick.
## T.B.D. 

* Netgear ReadyDuo V1 NAS
 * linux server --> Win10 will not read drives by default
 * apparently finicky about constant power during boot!
 * factory reset wipes data?!?!? WTF!?!?
* Data on LVM partition non standard block sizes (16kB)
 * Ubuntu live CD hates this by default (workable though)
 * why did I choose this block size?
